Geology

Chapter 1 Notes

The Cosmology & Birth of Earth

*Universe - All of space and all of the matter and energy within it.

*Scientific Cosmology - Systematic stude of the overal structure and history of the Universe.
A modern Discipline

Geocentric Model - Earth is at the center of the universe - Not moving - Ptolemy

Heliocentric Model - The sun is at the center of the universe with planets orbiting around it. -Copernicus & Galileo

Gravity - The force of one object on another. - Isaac Newton

Solar System - The sun, planets, moons & other small objects held together via gravitational attraction.
 
Planet - Object that orbits a star, is a sphere and has cleared its neighborhood aka orbit.

8 planets - Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune & Uranus 

Moom - A sizeable body locked in orbit around a planet.  All but two planets have moons - Mercury & Mars

Terrestrial planets - 4 inner planets with a shell of rock surrounding a ball of metallic iron alloy

Gas-giant planets - 4 outer planets called Jovian Planets - Mass consists of gas & ice

Asteroids & Meteoroids - Located primarily in the Asteroid Belt (Chunks of rock & metal)
Comets & Oort Cloud - Kupier Belt Objects (Chunks of ice & gas)

Force - A push or pull that causes the velocity (speed) of an object to change in magnitude and or in direction

Mass - A quanity of matter

*Field Forces - include gravity & magnetism

Gravity - The force of attraction between two objects (or masses)
>Distance between objects
>Mass of the object

Magnetism - The force that is generated by electricity flowing in a wire or by special materials called magnets.
Pulls objects together and pulls objects apart(repulsive)

Pluto & Eris are "dwarf planets"

Stars - Immense balls of incandescent gas in which nuclear fusion reactions to produce heat and light.  Gravity holds 
stars together in groups called galaxies.

Our solar system has 1 star - The Sun

Our galaxy has the sun and over 300B stars which all make up the Milkey Way Galaxy
Within the Milkey way ther are over 500M Solar Systems such as ours.  The Andromeda is the closest
galaxy to ours and it is 2.2M light years away.

Greek Astronomer Eratosthenes 1st calculated the Earth's circumference to be (40,008km) 24,865 miles

A light year is the distance that light travels in one Earth year.

Matter - Material making up the universe

Mass - The amount of matter in an object

Densisty - The amount of mass with in a given volume.  A denser object contains more mass.

Atom - The smallest amount of matter

Elements - A material consisting entirely of one kind of Atom.  Elements CAN NOT be subdivided or changed by chemical reactions.

Compound - The smallest part of a molecule.  A material composed of two or more elements that CAN NOT be seperated mechanically.

Molecule - The smallest part of a compound that has the properties of the compund. It consists of two or more atoms attached
by chemical bonds.

